JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: We have to win.
We have to start
winning wars again.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
calls for a budget significantly
boosting money to the
military with deep cuts
to domestic spending.
Then: The Republican chair
of the House Intelligence
Committee says he's seen
no evidence of contact
between the Trump campaign and
Russian intelligence officials.
And hospitals brace for big
changes in health coverage, as
Republicans work to unravel the
Affordable Care Act.
ANNETTE SCHNABEL, CEO, Perry
Memorial Hospital: We have spent
the last six years gearing up
towards everything that we were
responsible for doing in the
ACA, and the idea of we might
have to totally go a different
direction or how will we do
that, it's going to take a
lot of work.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: More for defense,
less for most domestic programs.
That's the message from
the White House as it
works up a spending
blueprint for the coming
year.
John Yang begins our coverage,
from the White House.
JOHN YANG: Meeting with
the nation's governors
today, President Trump
outlined a spending
plan to fulfill his campaign
promise to dramatically
beef up the Pentagon.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: This budget will
be a public safety and national
security budget.
And it will include an historic
increase in defense spending to
rebuild the depleted military
of the United States of America
at a time we most need it.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: The president wants
to hike defense spending 10
percent, to $603 billion, for
the budget year
beginning October 1.
Budget officials said Mr. Trump
will also seek increases for law
enforcement and first-responders
and money for the border wall.
DONALD TRUMP: We're going to
do more with less and make the
government lean and accountable
to the people.
We can do so much more
with the money we spend.
With $20 trillion in debt,
can you imagine that?
The government must learn to
tighten its belt, something
families all across the country
have had to learn to
do, unfortunately.
JOHN YANG: To avoid adding to
the deficit, Mr. Trump wants
to cut domestic spending by
the same $54 billion he wants
to boost military spending.
Officials said virtually every
federal agency will see cuts,
along with major reduction
in foreign aid.
White House Budget
Director Mick Mulvaney:
MICK MULVANEY, White
House Budget Director:
Yes, it's a fairly small
part of the discretionary
budget, but it's still
consistent with what
the president said.
When you see these reductions,
you will be able to tie it
back to speech the president
gave or something the
president has said previously.
JOHN YANG: Budget officials
said proposals for taxes and
entitlement programs like Social
Security and Medicare
will come later.
DONALD TRUMP: Nobody
knew that health care
could be so complicated.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Trump also talked
to the governors and later with
top health insurance executives
about repealing and replacing
the Affordable Care Act.
DONALD TRUMP: We must
work together to save
Americans from Obamacare.
People know that and everyone
knows that at this point, to
create more competition and
to bring down the
prices substantially.
JOHN YANG: That was echoed
by Republican governors like
Rick Snyder of Michigan.
GOV.
RICK SNYDER (R), Michigan:
This is a time for reform, to
broaden the issue from beyond
coverage to how do we do better
quality, better cost containment
for the long term and ultimately
it's about compassion.
We're talking real people here.
JOHN YANG: Democrats,
led by National Governors
Association Chairman Terry
McAuliffe of Virginia,
warned that ending
Obamacare would create major
funding gaps for Medicaid.
GOV.
TERRY MCAULIFFE (D), Virginia:
At this point, we have not
been provided any information
that we want, other than we
want everybody to have health
care, we want to make accessible
and affordable to all.
The devil is in the details.
I think the rhetoric of
the campaign has hit the
reality of governing.
JOHN YANG: The president
promised his address to Congress
tomorrow night would include a
big statement on rebuilding
the nation's roads and bridges.
White House Press Secretary
Sean Spicer said the president
would talk about solving real
problems for real Americans,
like creating jobs and
ending urban violence.
In addition to that 10 percent
increase for Pentagon spending
next year, senior administration
officials say that Mr. Trump
will ask for $30 billion
more for the Pentagon in this
budget year.
It's not clear yet how they are
going to pay for that -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John,
that was my question.
What are they saying about --
$30 billion is not chump change.
Where are they going
to come up with that?
JOHN YANG: Well, it's not only
that, also in this supplemental
appropriations request,
they are going to ask for money
for that first down payment
to start building the border
wall with Mexico.
If they don't want to add to
the deficit, which they say
they won't, and also to the
national debt, they're going
to have to find offsetting
cuts somewhere else because the
president says he's
not raising taxes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just quickly,
John, we know there were, as
you just reported, concerns
among Democratic governors
about the changes to Obamacare,
but over the weekend, there
were concerns expressed
by Republicans, too.
JOHN YANG: That's right.
This is one of those
complications that the
president talked about.
A number of Republicans,
Republican governors
like John Kasich of Ohio,
used Obamacare money
to expand Medicaid coverage,
Medicaid, the program that
takes care of health care for
the needy.
In Ohio, he added 525,000
uninsured people to
the Medicaid rolls.
If the Medicaid goes away,
they are going to either have
to find the money elsewhere
or start pushing people off
Medicaid rolls, neither of which
is very politically palatable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, John
Yang reporting for us from
the White House, thank you.
And in the day's other news,
the Senate moved to confirm the
president's nominee for commerce
secretary.
Billionaire investor Wilbur
Ross has said the administration
will work quickly to redo
NAFTA, the North American
Free Trade Agreement.
Meanwhile, the nominee
for Navy secretary, Philip
Bilden, withdrew last night.
He cited trouble in separating
from his business interests.
The Army secretary nominee,
Vincent Viola, withdrew earlier
this month over similar issues.
More bomb threats were called
in today to Jewish community
centers and day schools in
at least 12 states.
All appeared to be hoaxes.
The threats follow the weekend
destruction of more than 100
headstones at a Jewish cemetery
in Philadelphia.
Interfaith leaders in the
city called today for unity.
JILL MADERER, Rabbi: Every time
we are attacked by hate in the
cemetery or beyond, we have
come together in solidarity.
We will not only defend
our particular group.
Too many are vulnerable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A White House
spokesman said President Trump
condemns the vandalism and
bomb threats -- quote --
"in the strongest terms."
In the Philippines, the
military confirmed today that
Islamist militants linked to the
Islamic State group have
beheaded a German captive.
Abu Sayyaf had been holding
the 70-year-old hostage on a
southern island since last fall.
They demanded $600,000, but
the ransom deadline passed
Sunday without payment.
Dozens of shops were ransacked
overnight in Johannesburg,
South Africa, the latest in
a wave of violence apparently
aimed at immigrants.
There's been similar looting
in Pretoria this month.
On Friday, hundreds of
anti-immigrant protesters
marched in Pretoria.
It comes amid claims that
foreigners are fomenting crime
and taking jobs from locals.
Back in this country, theft of
opioid drugs has become a major
problem at veterans' hospitals.
The Associated Press
reports more than
11,000 cases since 2010.
But it says that VA staffers
were disciplined in only
3 percent of the cases.
A top VA official, Dr. Carolyn
Clancy, told a House hearing
today that most of the missing
medicine is being
lost in the mail.
Republican Neil Dunn of
Florida was incredulous.
REP.
NEAL DUNN (R), Florida:
And somewhere between
once the VA has the drug
and once the VA passes
it off to another part
of the VA, the drugs
are being diverted?
Is that the system?
DR.
CAROLYN CLANCY, Veterans
Administration: No, this
is outside the VHA system.
REP.
NEAL DUNN: So, I have to tell
you, I just - - I have --
35 years, I have never heard
this kind of accusation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Clancy
did say the department
is adding inspectors
and expanding employee
drug testing.
Japanese air bag maker
Takata pleaded guilty
to a federal criminal
charge today in Detroit.
The company also agreed
to pay $1 billion
over faulty inflators.
They're blamed for at
least 16 deaths and
180 injuries worldwide.
Meanwhile, in Miami, plaintiffs
in dozens of lawsuits charged
that Takata and five automakers
knew the inflators were
dangerous, but kept using them
because they were cheaper.
On Wall Street today, stocks
had a relatively quiet time, but
the Dow Jones industrial average
did hit a record close for
the 12th session in a row.
It gained 15 points
to close at 20837.
The Nasdaq rose 16, and
the S&P 500 added two.
And they're still trying to
figure out what caused a mix-up
for the ages at the Oscars
last night.
Presenters Warren
Beatty and Faye Dunaway
mistakenly announced
"La La Land" as the best
picture winner after being
given the wrong envelope.
Moments later, came
word that "Moonlight"
was the actual winner.
PWC, the company responsible
for tabulating the vote
results, says it's investigating
just what happened.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Congress grapples with questions
over whether an investigation
into the Trump administration's
ties to Russia have been
tainted; hospitals brace for big
losses if Obamacare is repealed;
a look at the Democrats'
choice of a new party chair
with our politics Monday
duo; and much more.
We turn our focus now to claims
that the Trump presidential
campaign was in contact with
Russian intelligence officials,
and new concerns over how
they should be investigated.
REP.
DEVIN NUNES (R), California:
We still have not seen any
evidence of anyone that's from
the Trump campaign or any other
campaign for that matter that's
communicated with the Russian
government.
JUDY WOODRUFF: House
Intelligence Chair Devin
Nunes met reporters this
morning, and responded
to questions over his
committee's investigation
into whether President
Trump's associates
had ties to Russia during the
presidential campaign or after.
Nunes drew criticism after a
Washington Post article revealed
that he agreed to talk to
a reporter at the White House's
request about a New York
Times story that alleged Trump
associates spoke with
Russian intelligence.
REP.
DEVIN NUNES: That story was a
little odd, I thought, because
if you ask me to contact
the White House and
said, hey, could you set
me up with somebody at
DOD or the intelligence
agencies, I would say sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: CIA Director
Mike Pompeo and Senator Richard
Burr, chair of the Senate
Intelligence Committee, were
also reported to have been
contacted by the White House
press secretary to make
calls about the story.
Nunes acknowledged the
investigation was ongoing,
but said he wanted to
be careful not to jump
into a witch-hunt, comparing it
to the Red Scare of the 1950s.
REP.
DEVIN NUNES: We can't have
McCarthyism back in this place.
We can't have the government,
the U.S. government or
the Congress, legislative
branch of government
chasing down American citizens,
hauling them before the Congress
as if they're some secret
Russian agent.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At the White
House, spokesman Sean Spicer
defended his request to see CIA
Director Pompeo and the
Congressional Intelligence
Committee chairs and,
echoing Nunes, declared
there was no story.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary: We have heard the
same people, the same anecdotes,
and we have heard reports
over and over again.
And as Chairman Nunes very
clear today, he has seen
nothing that corroborates that.
So at what point you got
to ask yourself, what
are you investigating?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Among
those still not convinced,
former President George
W. Bush, who told
NBC's "Today Show" that the
questions about links to
Russia need to be answered.
Amid growing calls for an
independent investigation
into Russia's attempts
to influence the U.S.
election, I spoke earlier
with Senator Mark Warner,
vice chairman of the
Senate Intelligence
Committee.
I asked for his reaction to
the White House enlisting U.S.
intelligence community leaders
and congressional Intelligence
Committee chairs to help counter
news stories about the Trump
campaign's contacts with
Russia's intelligence officials.
SEN.
MARK WARNER (D), Virginia: Well,
my reaction was grave concern
and an awful lot of frustration.
We are at the early stages
of our investigation.
We have bipartisan
Intelligence Committee
staff today working over
reviewing basic intelligence.
We have been at this now
for a couple of weeks.
We're making progress.
For anyone to try to
interfere at this early
stage of an investigation
just makes no sense.
Let's take for a moment, even
if the White House's position
was correct, by asking these
figures to interfere and lobby,
they then potentially color the
results of this investigation.
I have no idea why they would
try to interfere at this point,
when this investigation is
ongoing.
The good news is, Judy, though,
that we have heard, over the
last couple of days, from
a number of the members of
the committee, Democrats and
Republicans alike, folks like
Senator Rubio and Senator
Collins, who have all
said very strongly they
continue to support
an investigation that's
bipartisan, that will
follow the facts wherever
they may lead, that
won't allow outside interference
like the White House and others.
And as long as we have got a
strong majority of the committee
that's committed to that
process, I think we're
the best place and best
forum to go forward.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, what the
White House press secretary,
Sean Spicer, said today,
Senator, was, he said, this
was simply in response to the
request from these reporters.
The reporters were asking
for the White House version.
The White House said, in order
to give you any corroboration,
it was the only way they
could do that was to send
them to these other officials.
SEN.
MARK WARNER: One of the things
about an Intelligence Committee
investigation is that you don't
talk about the ongoing
processes before you
have a finished product.
We're really still
at the early stages.
There are enormous amounts
of information that
has to be gone through.
We have seen massive Russian
intervention in the election.
We have seen hacking.
We have seen a number of
indications of individuals
affiliated with Mr.
Trump who've had contacts
with Russian officials.
We need to find the extent
of those contacts, the
content of those contacts.
So, somehow, asking folks to
interfere on a press story
before this investigation is
completed, to me, is both
inappropriate, improper
and, frankly, weakens
the White House's case
dramatically.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Senator,
that sounds different from
what Devin Nunes, who is the
House Intelligence
Committee chair, said today.
He said there is no
evidence that he knows
of now of any contacts
between the Trump campaign
and Russian
intelligence officials.
SEN.
MARK WARNER: Judy, there are
-- the one thing I think that
has been made clear is there
are ongoing investigations.
Anyone that jumps to a
conclusion while there
are ongoing investigations
and tries to make
a definitive fact and definitive
statement I think does a great
disservice to the American
people.
There is nothing more important
than, when we have got the
potential of a foreign nation,
not only interfering in
our election process,
but lord knows what else.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well,
two other quick things.
Chairman Nunes went on to
say that this shouldn't
become a witch-hunt.
Is that a legitimate
concern here?
SEN.
MARK WARNER: Listen, what
the chairman of the House has
done by trying to interfere
in the investigation really
raises huge concerns.
As somebody who has to go back
and continue to make the case
to my Democratic colleagues
that this investigation is
going to be done straight up,
in an honest and straightforward
way, obviously, Chairman Nunes'
actions don't help that cause.
And, you know, and if this
ends up defaulting into some
kind of partisan food fight, at
the end of the day, what happens
is, the American public don't
get the answers they deserve.
I have said from the outset,
Judy, there's nothing I have
done in my Senate career that's
more important than
this investigation.
It has to be done right, it
has to be done bipartisan,
and it has to follow the facts
wherever they lead.
And when you have got
particularly an administration
like this one, which
has, unfortunately, in
the president, disrespected
the intelligence community so
many times during the campaign,
it's more important than
ever that the intelligence
community feels that
there is somebody that
has got their back and that
they can do their job in
an honest and truthful way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Senator,
your Democratic in the Senate
Senator Dick Durbin is saying
there needs to be an
outside independent
commission looking into it.
SEN.
MARK WARNER: If I find
that we can't get access
to the information we
need, yes, I will be
willing to call for that.
But, let's remember,
if we were to pass an
independent commission,
it would require passage
of the House, passage of the
Senate, and a significant
by this president.
Who would say that that
independent commission
would truly be independent?
It would also take that
commission literally
months to get up to speed.
We have people working today
in a bipartisan fashion trying
to get the facts to get to
the bottom of this.
I think the American
public deserve answers
sooner than later.
And my fear is the independent
commission, one, would
it truly be independent?
Would it truly get passed and
be signed by this president?
And then it would take
literally months to get
it set up and established.
I think, as long as we can
continue to do this with the
majority of the Intelligence
Committee committed to
doing this bipartisan,
independent, and making
sure we get the facts,
this is still the way to go.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Mark
Warner, the vice chair of the
Senate Intelligence Committee,
we thank you.
SEN.
MARK WARNER: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And for the
record, we reached out to every
Republican member of the Senate
Intelligence Committee.
They either declined or
didn't respond to our request.
Now more on Russian
and U.S. actions that
led us to this moment.
That's the subject of a lengthy
article in this week's "New
Yorker" magazine, and to
William Brangham.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So,
what is known, and not
known, about Russia's
involvement in our recent
election?
I'm joined now by Evan Osnos.
He's a staff writer at "The
New Yorker" and one of the
author's of "Active Measures,"
a deep look into
Russia's actions.
That's in the latest
edition of the magazine.
And I'm also joined
by John Sipher.
He spent 28 years in the CIA's
clandestine service, including
assignments in Russia and
Eastern Europe.
He's now at a consulting
company called CrossLead.
Welcome to you both.
So, Evan Osnos, really
a wonderful primer in
"The New Yorker" that
you wrote and several
of your colleagues.
Can you just bring
us up to speed.
What do we know, what don't
we know about Russia's
involvement in the election?
EVAN OSNOS, "The
New Yorker": Sure.
Yes.
This stories, which was a
collaboration with David Remnick
and Josh Yaffa in Moscow, was
an attempt to say, let's clarify
exactly what we have learned,
because this is an extraordinary
moment.
We now know that
three things happened.
The first thing is that, as
you know, the DNC was hacked.
John Podesta's
e-mail was hacked.
That's the one Americans I
think know the most about.
The second thing is that we
also know that there was an
influence campaign, an attempt
to really change what it
is that people believed
about the candidates.
The director of national
intelligence has said
that this occurred.
It's not a -- fake news is
a term that's now become
politicized in its own way.
But from the intelligence
community's perspective,
this is a known fact.
And then the third piece --
is this the one that I think
we're at the stage now of trying
to learn more about --
is whether or not and
to what degree there
were contacts between
Russian representatives
and elements perhaps of
Trump's campaign, his
advisers or his associates.
And that's really where
the center of gravity is
moving in the investigation.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: John
Sipher, you spent a
quarter-century in the CIA.
Do all of those allegations
against the Russians and their
involvement, does this all ring
true to you?
JOHN SIPHER, Former CIA
Officer: Oh, absolutely.
Russians have been doing
this for decades, if
not hundreds of years.
This is what they do.
What's interesting about this
is what fertile soil it took
place on, the fact that these
type of things, some of it
quite sloppy and open, actually
caused the problems they did
for us.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Do you
mean fertile soil here
in the United States?
JOHN SIPHER: I do.
I do.
The fact that they were able to
break in and steal DNC e-mails
and take advantage of that,
I'm surprised at
the effect that had.
I think it's unusual that you
had a campaign that was able
to use that and spin that up
and deal with the
Russian service here.
What I find interesting is
that there is a lot of concern
that the Trump campaign was
saying they didn't have
improper contact with
Russians during the campaign.
And my question would be,
what is proper contact?
Did they have contacts with
Germans, Indians, Japanese?
Why with Russians?
Why would a campaign in the
United States need to have
any contact with Russians?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: There could
be innocent explanations,
if members to have the Trump
campaign or his entourage
were talking with Russians.
Couldn't there be innocent
explanations for those?
EVAN OSNOS: Well, I think
that's the reason why we need
now a robust, independent and
thorough investigation.
We decided as an institution
that we needed to understand
this as best we could.
We interviewed dozens of people.
We spent months on this.
And I consider it the very
beginning of chapter one.
We are now in a position where
the legislative branch, the
executive branch has the ability
to go out and say, well,
what was the full universe of
contacts, what were the nature
of those contacts, and were they
serving the American public,
and do we know everything
we can?
Because, look, we
did that for 9/11.
We established a bipartisan,
independent commission
composed of five Republicans
and five Democrats.
And, as a result, we know a
huge amount about what happened.
We don't know that
yet about this event.
And I think we are really at
the stage where we're trying
to decide, what are the right
investigative tools and
who is going to do it?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: John, let's
just say that the evidence bears
out that the Russians really
were trying to put their
thumb on the scale here.
What were their
ambitions, in your sense?
What would they be
trying to do here?
JOHN SIPHER: This is
not much of a surprise.
Vladimir Putin's interests
have always been to divide
the United States from Europe.
He has a zero sum view of
working with the United States.
So anything that causes
chaos or creates problems
here is a win for him.
We see the same thing
happening now in France,
Germany, the Balkans.
He's even working with the
Taliban in Afghanistan.
So, this is the kind
of thing they do.
Their goal is to
essentially create
fissures in our alliances.
Anything that creates chaos and
tries to provide some sort of
moral equivalence between his
regime and the West, he likes
to say that, oh, this is no
different than you guys messing
around#~ in Libya and Egypt and
Syria and those type of things.
EVAN OSNOS: One of the
things, the surprise for
me in the course of this
work was to discover,
in effect, that the United
States was susceptible to
this kind of operation.
I spoke to people who used
to work on this in the State
Department who said, a couple
of years ago, we were worried
that Moldova, for instance,
would be vulnerable to this
kind of interference.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
Little, teeny Moldova.
(CROSSTALK)
EVAN OSNOS: Exactly.
And so, in a sense, the agents
behind this operation -- and
that's really what this was
- - it was an intelligence
operation -- discovered that our
politics were so divided, people
were already open to a
highly kind of propagandistic
form of political
communication, that we were
a prime target, in effect,
a soft target for this kind
of influence operation.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: One of the
things I was struck by in your
article is that you wrote,
towards the end of your piece,
where you described how some of
the intelligence agents think
that this was more of
an improvisation on
behalf of the Russians,
not a sort of strategic
campaign.
Can you explain the
distinction there?
EVAN OSNOS: Well,
speaking broadly about
sort of the impression
that people have who are
focused on this issue, is that
there's one way to think of it.
If you look at this dossier
of unverified claims that was
submitted earlier to the FBI
and was then presented to the
president, one of the claims
in there was that this was a
longstanding, five-, six-,
seven-year operation to
cultivate Donald Trump.
I think, at the moment, what
you find is that more people
who are focused on this issue
are inclined to believe that
this was an improvisation
that was changing.
There were elements that were
brought in at different points,
meaning it may have started
as a hacking operation.
It may have started as
an intelligence -- it
may have started as an
influence operation.
But the idea that this started
six, seven years ago, with a
discrete, fully formed plan
with a clear objective is
hard to defend at this point.
And I think that's one of the
reasons why we need to learn
more, because we don't know
exactly when and how it started.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Why would the
Russians have been interested
in Donald Trump back then?
Because, then, he was
a reality TV star.
He had no intention, seemingly,
of running for office.
JOHN SIPHER: I don't
know that they did.
I don't think we have that
information, if they were
particularly interested in him.
They certainly do collect
on any American of
interest who visits Russia.
The notion that they would
have videotapes in hotel rooms
or follow people around or
try to collect compromising
information on people,
this is what they do.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: John, how
does what we're seeing today
compare to what the Soviets used
to do back in the USSR?
JOHN SIPHER: What they're
doing now is very similar
to what they did before.
They just have new tools.
They have Mr. Snowden, who
gives them a lot of information
about the kind of things we
have and where to attack.
And they have some
really talented computer
programmers and hackers
there in Russia that...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And the
Internet more broadly.
JOHN SIPHER: Right.
Exactly.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Evan Osnos, John Sipher,
thank you both very much.
JOHN SIPHER: Thank you.
EVAN OSNOS: Glad to be here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now what
hospitals fear about
the possible costs of
repealing and replacing
the health care law.
Efforts by President Trump and
congressional Republicans to
unravel the Affordable Care
Act are unnerving many
hospital executives.
They say they're worried about
big changes to their bottom
line, particularly after they
overhauled how care is delivered
in response to the health
law's rewards and penalties.
While Republicans try to figure
out their game plan, special
correspondent Sarah Varney
reports on how hospitals
are bracing for the unknown.
This story was produced
in collaboration with our
partner Kaiser Health News.
SARAH VARNEY: Driving to work
amid the barren winter fields
in Northern Illinois, Cathie
Chapman is worried
about the future.
She lost her job after a
nearby rural hospital closed.
CATHIE CHAPMAN, Perry Memorial
Hospital: I was really lucky.
I found another great hospital
to work in with a wonderful
group of people who deliver
high-quality care.
But not everyone was as lucky.
SARAH VARNEY: And as Republicans
work to dismantle the Affordable
Care Act, she wonders if it
might happen again.
Now she runs the pharmacy
at Perry Memorial in
Princeton, Illinois.
And she's watching
the Republicans'
repeal efforts warily.
CATHIE CHAPMAN: I think
everybody who works in health
care now feels a little uneasy.
Even if you're a large,
profitable hospital,
we don't know what's
coming around the corner,
and how it will affect us.
SARAH VARNEY: Rural
hospitals have long
struggled to stay open:
They have far fewer patients
and thin margins.
Dozens have closed across the
country in recent years, mostly
in states that didn't expand
Medicaid.
But, in Illinois, which did
extend Medicaid to nearly all
poor adults, patients at Perry
Memorial have gained
coverage under the
Affordable Care Act and many
hospitals have found firmer
footing.
But Annette Schnabel, the
hospital's CEO, says if large
numbers of people lose their
insurance under the Republicans'
replacement, the hospital's
finances and its patients would
be at risk, especially after
the hospital has invested so
much money and time in complying
with the health law.
ANNETTE SCHNABEL, CEO, Perry
Memorial Hospital: We have spent
the last six years gearing up
towards everything that we were
responsible for doing in the
ACA, and the idea of we might
have to totally go a different
direction or how will we do
that, it's going to take a
lot of work.
There's a lot of effort
that is going into this.
SARAH VARNEY: And for
some hospitals to survive
or break even, it will
require Congress to
restore billions of dollars
in funding that kept hospitals
afloat before the law took
effect.
Hospitals made a high-stakes
trade when they signed on
to the Affordable Care Act.
They agreed to massive
cuts in federal aid that
defrayed the cost of
caring for the uninsured.
In exchange, they would
gain tens of millions of
newly insured customers.
Now that deal is in jeopardy
and hospital executives are
anxiously waiting to see what
comes next.
Stroger Hospital of Cook County,
in Chicago, is one of the
busiest hospitals in the nation.
Its emergency and trauma teams
have inspired shows like "E.R."
and "Chicago Med" and handle
most of the city's
gunshot victims.
The vast majority of patients
here used to be uninsured,
and the county-run hospital
struggled to take care
of all of their medical
and mental health needs.
Those patients now have
Medicaid coverage because of the
Affordable Care Act, and the
Cook County hospital system
has gained $200 million in new
revenue to cover their services,
breaking even for
the first time ever.
DR.
JAY SHANNON, CEO, Cook
County Health and Hospitals
System: We have no
interest in slipping back
in what we have been able to do.
SARAH VARNEY: Dr. Jay Shannon
is CEO of the Cook County
Health and Hospitals System.
DR.
JAY SHANNON: We're not able
to do the kind of work that we
do today with good will alone.
Our staff are not
a volunteer staff.
We can't get I.V. fluids
and medical equipment on
credit and a wink and a nod.
SARAH VARNEY: Two hospital trade
groups, the American Hospital
Association and the Federation
of American Hospitals,
have warned of -- quote
- - "an unprecedented
public health crisis"
if the law is hastily scuttled.
They say if Congress repeals
the law entirely and 20 million
people are kicked off their
insurance, hospitals
will lose $166 billion
in Medicaid payments
alone in the next decade
and face much steeper losses if
certain Medicare cuts that were
part of the law aren't restored.
In Chicago, limo driver Jerold
Exson (ph) is one of those
patients who could lose coverage
and have his hospital
bills once again go unpaid.
As of now, the hospital helps
enroll low-income adults
like Exson into Medicaid.
In 2014, he was shot nearly
a dozen times in a case
of mistaken identity.
His medical care is covered now,
and the hospital can provide
follow-up surgeries, physical
therapy and mental health
treatment that were often
off-limits to the uninsured.
WOMAN: How are
you feeling today?
I see you.
You're kind of down.
JEROLD EXSON, Chicago: I'm
not as edgy when I'm, like,
driving or out in public, around
a lot of people.
SARAH VARNEY: Exson sees
clinical psychologist
Natalia Ruiz (ph) to
manage the after-effects
of gun violence.
JEROLD EXSON: I had that
episode where I was driving that
time, and the little rock hit
the window, and it kind of
sent me into a tailspin.
SARAH VARNEY: The health law
also shifted the business
model for U.S. hospitals.
It offered them financial
incentives to move away from
expensive E.R. visits to primary
care and managing
chronic conditions.
Earl Williams Sr,. has
finally brought his
diabetes under control.
He's diligent about exercising,
taking his medication,
and seeing his doctor.
EARL WILLIAMS SR., Chicago:
My sugars was in the 200s.
They're now from 80 to 120,
where they're supposed to be.
Then they took some of the
medication away because I have
maintained due to teachings
of my doctors and the staff
here at Woodlawn Hospital.
SARAH VARNEY: Before
the Affordable Care Act,
hospitals had little
incentive to reduce E.R.
visits, especially from
Medicare patients who
generate a lot of revenue.
At the University of Chicago
Medicine, an academic medical
center, Dr. Kenneth Polonsky
says, if those incentives are
rescinded and patients forgo
preventive care, they will
clog up already strained
emergency rooms.
DR.
KENNETH POLONSKY, University
of Chicago Medicine: We will go
back to a very frustrating time,
where people had limited
options for health care
because of inability to
get health insurance.
SARAH VARNEY: The uncertainty is
also roiling county governments,
which often fund medical
care for the poor.
The burden on local taxpayers
to fund the Cook County Health
System has dropped by $300
million since the health
law went into effect.
President of the Cook County
Board of Commissioners
Toni Preckwinkle says
repealing the law could
force local governments
to raise taxes.
TONI PRECKWINKLE, President,
Cook County Board of
Commissioners: For us,
it's a $300 million
hole in our budget.
So, there aren't a lot
of options, other than
raising more revenue.
It's a nightmare for us.
SARAH VARNEY: She says the
county and the country have
been making progress and repeal
is a step backward.
In Waukegan, Illinois,
near the Wisconsin border:
BARBARA MARTIN, CEO,
Vista Health System:
What we're entering here
is our new open heart
surgery suite.
SARAH VARNEY: Vista Health
System CEO Barbara Martin says
with more insured patients and
additional reimbursement from
the health law, she's invested
in new equipment and hired
hundreds of new employees
across Vista's two
for-profit hospitals.
She says, if the 900,000
Illinois residents who
gained insurance under
the law lose coverage
and hospital revenue
drops suddenly, hospital
executives estimate
95,000 jobs could be lost.
BARBARA MARTIN: That could just
be catastrophic to the state
and catastrophic, not to only
Vista, to all hospitals
across the country.
SARAH VARNEY: But Edmund
Haislmaier, a senior
fellow at the Heritage
Foundation, a conservative
think tank, says U.S.
taxpayers already spend
too much on health care.
Haislmaier, who was a member
of President Trump's transition
team on health policy,
says communities and states
and local governments shouldn't
rely on hospitals to create new
jobs and fill
their budget holes.
EDMUND HAISLMAIER, Heritage
Foundation: Hospitals in
particular have become
economic development
projects.
If you're paying tax dollars
for a public program like
Medicare or Medicaid and you're
paying private insurance
premiums, this is all what
makes health care unaffordable.
SARAH VARNEY: More than
a dozen top Republican
lawmakers declined to
be interviewed for this
story.
But a spokesperson for Senator
Lamar Alexander, chairman of
the Senate Committee on Health,
Education, Labor and Pensions,
said in a statement that he is
listening to hospitals, doctors,
patients, governors and
others as they draft
the replacement plan.
Back in Chicago, that all
adds up to more questions for
patients like Earl Williams.
EARL WILLIAMS SR.: Am I
going to have insurance
in a month or two?
SARAH VARNEY: Questions doctors
are struggling to answer.
MAN: I'm going to give
it to you straight.
And that is, it's likely
that it's going to change.
It's not going to be the same.
SARAH VARNEY: With President
Trump and congressional
Republicans now saying
a final replacement
plan may not be ready
until later this year, the
uncertainty is likely to linger.
For the "PBS NewsHour" and
Kaiser Health News, I'm
Sarah Varney in Chicago.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
reshaping our view of Africa
and its central role in human
civilization.
But, first, from the
president's budget signals
to a new Democratic
Party leader, it's time
for Politics Monday with Tamara
Keith of NPR, and joining us
tonight from Miami, Amy Walter
of The Cook Political Report.
And welcome to both of you.
Happy Monday.
So, the White House is talking
budgets and health care today.
Amy, we're going to hear more
about what the president has in
mind in terms of their budget
blueprint tomorrow, but
essentially they're talking big
increases in defense, military
spending and big cuts in
domestic discretionary spending.
What are the political
realities here?
AMY WALTER, The Cook
Political Report: Yes.
The president is trying
to fulfill another one
of his campaign pledges.
We saw him earlier in
his presidency talking
about immigration,
passing executive orders,
and now wanting to
pass legislation
restricting immigration.
Now we're getting to the part
where he talked on the campaign
trail of making sure that
our defense spending is
increased and that we're going
to cut budgets domestically.
The question, of course, Judy,
is how you do that without
running up the deficit.
His OMB director today said we
can do this if we make those
cuts on domestic spending.
But the reality is, it's
going to be really tough,
especially when you add
into this discussions
that the president also
had today about increasing
funding for infrastructure
spending, and then,
of course, how we are going
to pay for that wall and all
of those extra agents who are
supposed to be
patrolling the border.
This is a party that for years
talked about reducing the
deficit, not spending more money
than you have.
This could be a
big budget buster.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's always
tougher to execute these things
than it is to talk about the
outline of what you want to do.
TAMARA KEITH, National
Public Radio: Yes.
Budgets, however, presidential
budgets, are vision documents.
This a vision document.
This is not what Congress
will ultimately end up voting
on or putting into place.
The other thing to point out
is that the president wants to
vastly increase defense spending
and cut it from discretionary
domestic spending.
But there is actually a
law in place right now that
says you can't do that.
It's the Budget
Control Act of 2011.
And so they would actually
have to find a way
around that law as well.
So it's always a bit more
complicated than it seems.
And this is just a blueprint.
This is very early, very
early in the process.
Earlier in the process --
usually, the White House doesn't
even talk about these kinds
of things at this
point in the process.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, so
speaking of political realities,
Amy, the Democrats chose a new
party chair over the
weekend, Tom Perez.
He's the former labor secretary.
Hard-fought contest.
What does this say about the
Democratic Party right now?
And what do you look
to Tom Perez to do?
AMY WALTER: Well, whoever was
elected DNC chair was coming
into a pretty rough position.
Look, what's not talked about
all that much is that, despite
the big loss for Democrats
in 2016 of the White
House, they have been
losing seats, especially
at the state legislative,
governor's level, and of
course at the congressional
level, ever since
President Obama was elected
in 2009.
So Tom Perez is coming
into a deep, deep hole.
The most important thing he
can do -- I know the candidates
talked a lot about philosophy.
We heard a lot during the
campaign for DNC chair about
this being a proxy between the
Bernie Sanders, Elizabeth
Warren wing and the
Hillary Clinton wing.
In reality, the number one
challenge for Tom Perez or any
DNC chairman is to get the party
back to winning, especially
at the legislative level.
Remember, redistricting
comes back up in 2020.
If Democrats want any shot
getting control of Congress,
getting a better map, if they
want to be able to start
controlling some of these state
legislative bodies, they have
got to start winning
on the ground.
And so unless and until
Democrats start to do
that, all this discussion
about philosophy
and direction of the party
don't mean very much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: He's
got his work cut out.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, absolutely.
Also, just to note that this is
an organization that -- the DNC
itself was hacked in the last
year and was completely rocked
by that hacking, and is simply
an organization that is back
on its heels and needs
to recover just simply
as an organization,
never mind the Democratic
Party more broadly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, we
are talking about the Democrats
and Republicans tonight.
Amy, you wrote this week about
what you called divided America,
and you looked at how different
groups of voters see
President Trump differently.
Give us a taste of that.
AMY WALTER: Well, Judy,
you know this quite well.
Usually, when a president comes
in -- he's only been in a month
-- he has something called
a honeymoon period.
This president didn't
even really get a
weekend at Niagara Falls.
He went from before a
very polarizing candidate
for president to being a
very polarizing president.
But, to be fair, I went and I
looked and I said, well, where
was President Obama at this
point -- not at this
point, but in his last
month of his presidency?
And we were almost as
polarized then by race,
by gender, by education.
And what we have seen
with President Trump
is the same fault lines
we saw on the campaign
trail.
If you are white, if you are
male, if you didn't attend
college, you have a stronger
approval rating than if you're
female, if you're non-white,
if you attended college.
They're a little bit bigger,
these gaps, than when President
Obama was in office, but the
bottom line is, Donald Trump
didn't invent polarized
America, but it is certainly as
polarized, if not slightly
more, than even where we were
a year ago, or less than year
ago, a month ago.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it
seems like a hundred years
ago, or a minute ago.
I can't tell which.
(LAUGHTER)
TAMARA KEITH: Both.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Tamara, you
got a close-up look at this.
You were on the ground in Saint
Louis, Missouri, this past week
talking to voters about it.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, and I
talked to a range of voters.
What really stood out
to me is, I interviewed
three Trump voters.
And they have three sort
of different views of
President Trump already.
You have sort of the base,
core voter who is a factory
worker who lost his job about
a decade ago.
And he loves everything Donald
Trump is doing, can't get enough
and loves it every time there
is a bad headline, because
he thinks Donald Trump must
be doing something right.
His wife, on the other hand,
feels like the president moved
a little too fast with the
executive orders.
And then another Trump voter I
talked to said that he really
figured that the president
would be more presidential
when he came into office, and
he wants him to have a thicker
skin and stop tweeting.
He says, you know, we're
looking up to you with our eyes
hoping that you're going to
help us.
We need to see more from you.
And then I talked to one other
voter who voted for Hillary
Clinton, and she feels like he's
not her president and
that she's invisible.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So it's
interesting that, already,
these voters are forming
clearer impressions
of this president.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, in
that first month...
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's not
fuzzy, in other words.
TAMARA KEITH: It's not fuzzy.
They have strong views of him.
And it's already sort of setting
in after just a month in office.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tamara Keith
of NPR, Amy Walter on the
road in Miami, thank you both.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
AMY WALTER: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, looking
ahead, please join us tomorrow
night for special "PBS NewsHour"
coverage of President
Trump's address to a
joint session of Congress.
It begins on Twitter at 7:00
p.m. Eastern and on your
local station at 9:00 p.m.
Next: a preview of a new
PBS documentary series,
"Africa's Great Civilizations."
Audie Cornish of NPR's "All
Things Considered" has our look.
AUDIE CORNISH: The history of
the African continent, home to
the 15 percent of the world's
population, remains
a mystery for many.
Historian and Harvard Professor
Henry Louis Gates Jr. admits,
in his youth, it was a place
he rarely considered.
Now he has a new PBS
documentary series that
reveals great moments in
the continent's pre-colonial
history.
It's called "Africa's
Great Civilizations."
He joins me now to
discuss that work.
Henry Louis Gates Jr.,
welcome to the program.
HENRY LOUIS GATES JR.,
Harvard University: Thanks.
Thanks for having me on.
AUDIE CORNISH: So, you
have tackled all kinds
of African-American
history, but this goes
all the way back, way
back to cave paintings.
So, what was the
genesis of this idea?
HENRY LOUIS GATES JR.: I wanted
to do a comprehensive history
of Africa, and this is it.
I have been thinking
about it five years.
Took us a year to shoot.
We went to 12 African countries.
And it's exhilarating,
six-hour series on 200,000
years of African history.
When I was growing up, Africa
was a place to be avoided,
even for black people.
Our images of Africa came
from Tarzan and Ramar
and Sheena of the jungle.
And we were embarrassed
about Africa.
AUDIE CORNISH: As you
talked about the effort to
kind of distance, right?
It was used as an insult
within the community.
HENRY LOUIS GATES JR.: You
black African, oh, my God,
that was like the N-word.
But all that changed for me.
It began to change in 1960,
when I was 10 years old,
and 17 African nations
became independent.
And I had a very smart
geography teacher, Mr.
McHenry, our only male teacher.
And he was very much
into current events.
And I was very much into
being a good student.
And a lot of the current
events featured these emerging,
new African countries.
And so I mesmerized
romantic sounding, rhythmic
names like Masha Chubay
(ph) and Patrice Lumumba
and Mogadishu, words like that.
And I became fascinated with
Africa, slowly, but surely
making my way to Africa when I
was 19 years old.
AUDIE CORNISH: I think we can
hear that in your introduction.
I want to play a clip of that.
HENRY LOUIS GATES JR.: OK.
Africa is the home
of the world's most
ancient civilizations.
Far to too often, Africa has
been thought of isolated and
static, but nothing could
be further from the truth.
The roots of every
family tree trace here to
Africa, and so does the
history of civilization.
In this series, we will be
going on a journey through
200,000 years of history.
We will explore great cities
built along Africa's extensive
trade networks, discover art of
unparalleled beauty,
technical brilliance,
and marvel at thousands
of years of breathtaking
architecture.
AUDIE CORNISH: What struck me
watching this is that you use
words like merchants and trade
and engineering.
It seemed like you were
really trying to stress
the achievements here.
HENRY LOUIS GATES JR.: Mm-hmm.
AUDIE CORNISH: Why do you
think those achievements
have been obscured?
HENRY LOUIS GATES JR.: I think
the achievements have been
obscured, first of all, because
of slavery -- 12.5 million
Africans were shipped across the
Atlantic Ocean between the 16th
century and the 19th century,
12.5 million Africans shipped
to enslavement in the new
world.
And then after 1884 was the
conference in Berlin, when
European powers sat down, looked
at an empty map of Africa,
and basically carved it up
like you carve up a pizza pie.
And they go, you're Spain.
What do you want?
You're Italy.
You're England.
What do you want?
You're King Leopold.
He personally got the Congo.
So, they had to create a
fiction of Africa as an empty
place or a static place full of
primitive people who
were stuck in time.
And those were
ostensibly our ancestors.
But the pre-colonial world
knew all about Africa.
There wasn't a moment
really since the ancient
Egyptians when Northern
Africa, the Mediterranean
world and the larger world
wasn't in touch with African
civilizations, with some part
of Africa.
The Red Sea was a highway.
The Nile was a highway.
The Sahara was a highway,
particularly after
the domestication of
camels, and the Indian
Ocean, highways.
The emperor of great Zimbabwe
ate off porcelain plates
that came from China.
That's the 13th century.
It's incredible.
Most of Europe's gold
between 1000 A.D. and 1500
A.D. came from West Africa.
All our history
was stolen from us.
We were robbed of a history
because Europeans wanted to
justify an economic order which
depended upon our
ancestors' exploitation.
AUDIE CORNISH: It's almost as
though you are taking these
stories out of the footnotes
of history and elevating them.
HENRY LOUIS GATES JR.:
That's an excellent metaphor.
We need for the facts of Africa
and African-American history to
be a normal, naturalized part of
the curriculum, to be moved from
the footnotes up into the text.
Black History Month is
great, but we need every day
to be Black History Month.
And what does that mean?
When you take a course in
the history of civilization,
Africa should be there as well.
And I'm not talking about
mythic claims that won't
stand scholarly scrutiny.
I mean facts about the
history of the world
which every educated
person should know about.
Knowing your history
is empowering.
And Africa stands poised
on the birth of resurgence,
a new renaissance.
As you said, 15 percent of the
world's population lives on
the great African continent.
And knowing about this rich and
splendid history will be crucial
to the individual self-esteem
of every African and to the
collective, as it were, sense
of itself of the African people.
AUDIE CORNISH: Henry Louis
Gates Jr., thank you so much
for speaking with us about this
project.
HENRY LOUIS GATES JR.: Thank you
for having me on the program.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The series runs
tonight, tomorrow, and Wednesday
at 9:00 p.m./8:00 Central on
most PBS stations.
Now to our "NewsHour" Shares,
something that caught our eye
that might be of interest to
you, too.
February is Hockey Is for
Everyone Month in the National
Hockey League, and one woman
traveled all the way from Abu
Dhabi to join the celebration.
The "NewsHour"'s Julia Griffin
caught up with her on the ice.
JULIA GRIFFIN: Though you
wouldn't expect it, given her
country's climate, Fatima Al
Ali is an ace on the ice.
The 27-year-old is from
the United Arab Emirates
and is shattering
preconceptions of what a
hockey player looks like.
Al Ali picked up a hockey stick
for the first just six years
ago, but her puck-handling
skills have already earned
her a spot on the UAE's
women's national team.
In November, those skills caught
the eye of former Washington
Capitals star Peter Bondra.
PETER BONDRA, Former NHL
Player: I played the game
professionally for 23 years.
And if I tried to do the stuff
which she does, I have to
learn, and I'm not sure exactly
how it be accomplished,
just to be honest.
JULIA GRIFFIN: Bondra was
so impressed by Al Ali's
abilities that he posted a video
to Twitter, saying, "She
has better hands than me."
That video went viral, and a
few weeks later, he surprised
Al Ali with a dream trip to meet
the Caps.
Coincidentally, that's
her favorite NHL team.
PETER BONDRA: February
is a month for of
Hockey for Everyone.
I think you will be a
great ambassador for this.
JULIA GRIFFIN: For soft-spoken
Al Ali, taking the ice with the
team was a thrill of a lifetime.
FATIMA AL ALI, Hockey
Player: It's not expected.
It's just unbelievable.
JULIA GRIFFIN: Over the
next hour, the rink was
a level playing field.
And she wasted no time sliding
into drills and scoring goals.
Al Ali's idol, Caps captain Alex
Ovechkin, praised her talent.
MD-BALEX OVECHKIN, Washington
Capitals: She's going to be
famous and she's going to
be a star.
JULIA GRIFFIN: But Al Ali
doesn't just impress male
counterparts here in the U.S.
She also holds her own back
home as a men's games referee.
FATIMA AL ALI: I had two
fights before coming here.
The first one ended up bad.
I got punched in the
face with, but I kept -
- I finished the game.
And then the second fight,
they told me how to break the
fight, so I was just pulling
them from their pants.
JULIA GRIFFIN: No matter what
side of the puck she is on,
Al Ali hopes she can be a
role model.
FATIMA AL ALI: I hope
that I can inspire enough
people, or at least women.
Have a dream, just
go make it come true.
JULIA GRIFFIN: Fitting advice
for pursuing goals from a woman
who excels at scoring them.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Julia Griffin
in Washington, D.C.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And an
inspiration for a lot of little
girls looking at hockey.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now, we take a look inside the
secret process that's supposed
to prevent mishaps at the
Academy Awards like the one that
occurred last night over the
best picture award.
We also have a trove
of conversations with
the filmmakers and
artists behind the award
season's most acclaimed movies.
You can find all of our
coverage in our Beyond the
Red Carpet series on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Tuesday, a reminder: We will
have special coverage of the
president's speech to a joint
session of Congress.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.